<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Before <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero’s</b> cell.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</b>, bearing a log.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There be some sports are painful, and their labour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Delight in them sets off: some kinds of baseness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are nobly undergone and most poor matters</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Point to rich ends. This my mean task</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would be as heavy to me as odious, but</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mistress which I serve quickens what’s dead</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And makes my labours pleasures: O, she is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ten times more gentle than her father’s crabbed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he’s composed of harshness. I must remove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some thousands of these logs and pile them up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon a sore injunction: my sweet mistress</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weeps when she sees me work, and says, such baseness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had never like executor. I forget:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most busy lest, when I do it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</b>; and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</b> at a distance, unseen.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, now, pray you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Work not so hard: I would the lightning had</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin’d to pile!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray, set it down and rest you: when this burns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twill weep for having wearied you. My father</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is hard at study; pray now, rest yourself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’s safe for these three hours.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O most dear mistress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sun will set before I shall discharge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What I must strive to do.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If you’ll sit down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll bear your logs the while: pray, give me that;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll carry it to the pile.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, precious creature;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than you should such dishonour undergo,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While I sit lazy by.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It would become me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As well as it does you: and I should do it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With much more ease; for my good will is to it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yours it is against.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor worm, thou art infected!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This visitation shows it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td>You look wearily.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, noble mistress; ’tis fresh morning with me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When you are by at night. I do beseech you⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is your name?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Miranda.⁠—O my father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have broke your hest to say so!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Admired Miranda!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Indeed the top of admiration! worth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What’s dearest to the world! Full many a lady</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have eyed with best regard and many a time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brought my too diligent ear: for several virtues</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I liked several women; never any</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With so fun soul, but some defect in her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And put it to the foil: but you, O you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So perfect and so peerless, are created</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of every creature’s best!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do not know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One of my sex; no woman’s face remember,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save, from my glass, mine own; nor have I seen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More that I may call men than you, good friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And my dear father: how features are abroad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am skilless of; but, by my modesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The jewel in my dower, I would not wish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Any companion in the world but you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor can imagination form a shape,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides yourself, to like of. But I prattle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Something too wildly and my father’s precepts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I therein do forget.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am in my condition</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would, not so!⁠—and would no more endure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This wooden slavery than to suffer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The very instant that I saw you, did</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart fly to your service; there resides,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make me slave to it; and for your sake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am I this patient log-man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td>Do you love me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And crown what I profess with kind event</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I speak true! if hollowly, invert</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What best is boded me to mischief! I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond all limit of what else i’ the world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do love, prize, honour you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am a fool</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To weep at what I am glad of.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fair encounter</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of two most rare affections! Heavens rain grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On that which breeds between ’em!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>Wherefore weep you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>At mine unworthiness that dare not offer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What I desire to give, and much less take</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What I shall die to want. But this is trifling;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the more it seeks to hide itself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am your wife, if you will marry me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not, I’ll die your maid: to be your fellow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may deny me; but I’ll be your servant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether you will or no.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My mistress, dearest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I thus humble ever.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td>My husband, then?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, with a heart as willing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As bondage e’er of freedom: here’s my hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And mine, with my heart in’t: and now farewell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till half an hour hence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>A thousand thousand!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</b> severally.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So glad of this as they I cannot be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who are surprised withal; but my rejoicing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At nothing can be more. I’ll to my book,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For yet ere supper-time must I perform</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much business appertaining. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the island.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Tell not me; when the butt is out, we will drink water; not a drop before: therefore bear up, and board ’em. Servant-monster, drink to me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Servant-monster! the folly of this island! They say there’s but five upon this isle: we are three of them; if th’ other two be brained like us, the state totters.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee: thy eyes are almost set in thy head.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Where should they be set else? he were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>My man-monster hath drown’d his tongue in sack: for my part, the sea cannot drown me; I swam, ere I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Your lieutenant, if you list; he’s no standard.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>We’ll not run, Monsieur Monster.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Nor go neither; but you’ll lie like dogs and yet say nothing neither.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Moon-calf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a good moon-calf.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How does thy honour? Let me lick thy shoe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll not serve him; he’s not valiant.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Thou liest, most ignorant monster: I am in case to justle a constable. Why, thou deboshed fish thou, was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as I to-day? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a monster?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>Lo, how he mocks me! wilt thou let him, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>“Lord” quoth he! That a monster should be such a natural!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>Lo, lo, again! bite him to death, I prithee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head: if you prove a mutineer,⁠—the next tree! The poor monster’s my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Marry, will I: kneel and repeat it; I will stand, and so shall Trinculo.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>, invisible</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td>Thou liest.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would my valiant master would destroy thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do not lie.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in’s tale, by this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Why, I said nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I say, by sorcery he got this isle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From me he got it. If thy greatness will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Revenge it on him,⁠—for I know thou darest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But this thing dare not,⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>That’s most certain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>Thou shalt be lord of it and I’ll serve thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>How now shall this be compassed? Canst thou bring me to the party?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yea, yea, my lord: I’ll yield him thee asleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td>Thou liest; thou canst not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What a pied ninny’s this! Thou scurvy patch!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take his bottle from him: when that’s gone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He shall drink nought but brine; for I’ll not show him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where the quick freshes are.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Trinculo, run into no further danger: interrupt the monster one word further, and, by this hand, I’ll turn my mercy out o’ doors and make a stock-fish of thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Why, what did I? I did nothing. I’ll go farther off.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Didst thou not say he lied?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td>Thou liest.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Do I so? take thou that. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Beats Trinculo.</i> As you like this, give me the lie another time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>I did not give the lie. Out o’ your wits and hearing too? A pox o’ your bottle! this can sack and drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the devil take your fingers!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>Ha, ha, ha!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Now, forward with your tale. Prithee, stand farther off.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Beat him enough: after a little time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll beat him too.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Stand farther. Come, proceed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, as I told thee, ’tis a custom with him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ th’ afternoon to sleep: there thou mayst brain him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having first seized his books, or with a log</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or cut his wezand with thy knife. Remember</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First to possess his books; for without them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’s but a sot, as I am, nor hath not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One spirit to command: they all do hate him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He has brave utensils,⁠—for so he calls them,⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which when he has a house, he’ll deck withal.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that most deeply to consider is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The beauty of his daughter; he himself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Calls her a nonpareil: I never saw a woman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But only Sycorax my dam and she;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But she as far surpasseth Sycorax</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As great’st does least.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Is it so brave a lass?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, lord; she will become thy bed, I warrant.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bring thee forth brave brood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Monster, I will kill this man: his daughter and I will be king and queen,⁠—save our graces!⁠—and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou like the plot, Trinculo?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Excellent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Give me thy hand: I am sorry I beat thee; but, while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Within this half hour will he be asleep:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wilt thou destroy him then?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Ay, on mine honour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td>This will I tell my master.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou makest me merry; I am full of pleasure:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us be jocund: will you troll the catch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You taught me but while-ere?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any reason. Come on, Trinculo, let us sing. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sings.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>Flout ’em and scout ’em</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And scout ’em and flout ’em;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thought is free.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>That’s not the tune. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b> plays the tune on a tabor and pipe.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>What is this same?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture of Nobody.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness: if thou beest a devil, take’t as thou list.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>O, forgive me my sins!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>He that dies pays all debts: I defy thee. Mercy upon us!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>Art thou afeard?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>No, monster, not I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be not afeard; the isle is full of noises,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sounds and sweet airs, that give delight and hurt not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, if I then had waked after long sleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will make me sleep again: and then, in dreaming,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The clouds methought would open and show riches</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ready to drop upon me, that, when I waked,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cried to dream again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall have my music for nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>When Prospero is destroyed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>That shall be by and by: I remember the story.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>The sound is going away; let’s follow it, and after do our work.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Lead, monster; we’ll follow. I would I could see this tabourer; he lays it on.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>Wilt come? I’ll follow, Stephano. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the island.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adrian</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Francisco</b>, and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By’r lakin, I can go no further, sir;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My old bones ache: here’s a maze trod indeed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through forth-rights and meanders! By your patience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I needs must rest me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Old lord, I cannot blame thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who am myself attach’d with weariness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the dulling of my spirits: sit down, and rest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even here I will put off my hope and keep it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No longer for my flatterer: he is drown’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</b>.</i> I am right glad that he’s so out of hope.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do not, for one repulse, forego the purpose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you resolved to effect.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</b>.</i> The next advantage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will we take throughly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</b>.</i> Let it be to-night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, now they are oppress’d with travel, they</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As when they are fresh.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</b>.</i> I say, to-night: no more. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Solemn and strange music.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td>What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td>Marvellous sweet music!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i>Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</b> above, invisible. Enter several strange Shapes, bringing in a banquet; they dance about it with gentle actions of salutation; and, inviting the King, <abbr>etc.</abbr> to eat, they depart.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td>Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A living drollery. Now I will believe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That there are unicorns, that in Arabia</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is one tree, the phoenix’ throne, one phoenix</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At this hour reigning there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll believe both;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what does else want credit, come to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I’ll be sworn ’tis true: travellers ne’er did lie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though fools at home condemn ’em.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If in Naples</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should report this now, would they believe me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I should say, I saw such islanders⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, certes, these are people of the island⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet, note,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their manners are more gentle-kind than of</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our human generation you shall find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Many, nay, almost any.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside</i> Honest lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast said well; for some of you there present</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are worse than devils.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot too much muse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such shapes, such gesture and such sound, expressing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Although they want the use of tongue, a kind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of excellent dumb discourse.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside</i> Praise in departing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Francisco</td>
							<td>They vanish’d strangely.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No matter, since</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have left their viands behind; for we have stomachs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will’t please you taste of what is here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td>Not I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who would believe that there were mountaineers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dew-lapp’d like bulls, whose throats had hanging at ’em</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each putter-out of five for one will bring us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good warrant of.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will stand to and feed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Although my last: no matter, since I feel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The best is past. Brother, my lord the duke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand to and do as we.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Thunder and lightning. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>, like a harpy; claps his wings upon the table; and, with a quaint device, the banquet vanishes.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath to instrument this lower world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what is in’t, the never-surfeited sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath caused to belch up you; and on this island</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where man doth not inhabit; you ’mongst men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And even with such-like valour men hang and drown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their proper selves. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</b> <abbr>etc.</abbr> draw their swords.</i> You fools! I and my fellows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are ministers of Fate: the elements,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of whom your swords are temper’d, may as well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wound the loud winds, or with bemock’d-at stabs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kill the still-closing waters, as diminish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One dowle that’s in my plume: my fellow-ministers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your swords are now too massy for your strengths</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will not be uplifted. But remember⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that’s my business to you⁠—that you three</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Milan did supplant good Prospero;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Him and his innocent child: for which foul deed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The powers, delaying, not forgetting, have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against your peace. Thee of thy son, Alonso,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have bereft; and do pronounce by me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lingering perdition, worse than any death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can be at once, shall step by step attend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You and your ways; whose wraths to guard you from⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon your heads⁠—is nothing but heart-sorrow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And a clear life ensuing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He vanishes in thunder; then, to soft music enter the Shapes again, and dance, with mocks and mows, and carrying out the table.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perform’d, my Ariel; a grace it had, devouring:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In what thou hadst to say: so, with good life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And observation strange, my meaner ministers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their several kinds have done. My high charms work</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And these mine enemies are all knit up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In their distractions; they now are in my power;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in these fits I leave them, while I visit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drown’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And his and mine loved darling. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit above.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ the name of something holy, sir, why stand you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this strange stare?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, it is monstrous, monstrous!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methought the billows spoke and told me of it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounced</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The name of Prosper: it did bass my trespass.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore my son i’ the ooze is bedded, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll seek him deeper than e’er plummet sounded</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with him there lie mudded. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But one fiend at a time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll fight their legions o’er.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td>I’ll be thy second. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All three of them are desperate: their great guilt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like poison given to work a great time after,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now ’gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hinder them from what this ecstasy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May now provoke them to.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adrian</td>
							<td>Follow, I pray you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
