<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-5-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Before <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero’s</b> cell.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</b> in his magic robes, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now does my project gather to a head:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My charms crack not; my spirits obey; and time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Goes upright with his carriage. How’s the day?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>On the sixth hour; at which time, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You said our work should cease.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I did say so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How fares the king and’s followers?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Confined together</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the same fashion as you gave in charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Just as you left them; all prisoners, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the line-grove which weather-fends your cell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They cannot budge till your release. The king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His brother and yours, abide all three distracted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the remainder mourning over them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brimful of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Him that you term’d, sir, “The good old lord Gonzalo;”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His tears run down his beard, like winter’s drops</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works ’em</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That if you now beheld them, your affections</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would become tender.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td>Dost thou think so, spirit?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td>Mine would, sir, were I human.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And mine shall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One of their kind, that relish all as sharply,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet with my nobler reason ’gainst my fury</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do I take part: the rarer action is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In virtue than in vengeance: they being penitent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sole drift of my purpose doth extend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not a frown further. Go release them, Ariel:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My charms I’ll break, their senses I’ll restore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they shall be themselves.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td>I’ll fetch them, sir. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes and groves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ye that on the sands with printless foot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do chase the ebbing Neptune and do fly him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he comes back; you demi-puppets that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof the ewe not bites, and you whose pastime</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is to make midnight mushrooms, that rejoice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weak masters though ye be, I have bedimm’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The noontide sun, call’d forth the mutinous winds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ’twixt the green sea and the azured vault</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set roaring war: to the dread rattling thunder</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I given fire and rifted Jove’s stout oak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With his own bolt; the strong-based promontory</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I made shake and by the spurs pluck’d up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pine and cedar: graves at my command</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let ’em forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By my so potent art. But this rough magic</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I here abjure, and, when I have required</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some heavenly music, which even now I do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To work mine end upon their senses that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This airy charm is for, I’ll break my staff,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And deeper than did ever plummet sound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll drown my book. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Solemn music.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b> before: then <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</b>, with a frantic gesture, attended by <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</b> in like manner, attended by <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Adrian</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Francisco</b> they all enter the circle which <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</b> had made, and there stand charmed; which <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</b> observing, speaks:</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A solemn air and the best comforter</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To an unsettled fancy cure thy brains,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now useless, boil’d within thy skull! There stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you are spell-stopp’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Holy Gonzalo, honourable man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine eyes, even sociable to the show of thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall fellowly drops. The charm dissolves apace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as the morning steals upon the night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Melting the darkness, so their rising senses</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their clearer reason. O good Gonzalo,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My true preserver, and a loyal sir</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him you follow’st! I will pay thy graces</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Home both in word and deed. Most cruelly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art pinch’d fort now, Sebastian. Flesh and blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, brother mine, that entertain’d ambition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Expell’d remorse and nature; who, with Sebastian,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would here have kill’d your king; I do forgive thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unnatural though thou art. Their understanding</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Begins to swell, and the approaching tide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will shortly fill the reasonable shore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That yet looks on me, or would know me: Ariel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will discase me, and myself present</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I was sometime Milan: quickly, spirit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt ere long be free.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b> sings and helps to attire him.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Where the bee sucks, there suck I:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In a cowslip’s bell I lie;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">There I couch when owls do cry.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">On the bat’s back I do fly</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">After summer merrily.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Merrily, merrily shall I live now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, that’s my dainty Ariel! I shall miss thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But yet thou shalt have freedom: so, so, so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the king’s ship, invisible as thou art:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There shalt thou find the mariners asleep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under the hatches; the master and the boatswain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being awake, enforce them to this place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And presently, I prithee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I drink the air before me, and return</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or ere your pulse twice beat. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All torment, trouble, wonder and amazement</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inhabits here: some heavenly power guide us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of this fearful country!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Behold, sir king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For more assurance that a living prince</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to thee and thy company I bid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A hearty welcome.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whether thou best he or no,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As late I have been, I not know: thy pulse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beats as of flesh and blood; and, since I saw thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The affliction of my mind amends, with which,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear, a madness held me: this must crave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An if this be at all, a most strange story.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be living and be here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>First, noble friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me embrace thine age, whose honour cannot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be measured or confined.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whether this be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or be not, I’ll not swear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You do yet taste</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some subtilties o’ the isle, that will not let you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Believe things certain. Welcome, my friends all!</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</b>.</i> But you, my brace of lords, were I so minded,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I here could pluck his highness’ frown upon you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And justify you traitors: at this time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will tell no tales.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside</i> The devil speaks in him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy rankest fault; all of them; and require</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou must restore.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If thou be’st Prospero,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give us particulars of thy preservation;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How thou hast met us here, who three hours since</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were wreck’d upon this shore; where I have lost⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How sharp the point of this remembrance is!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My dear son Ferdinand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td>I am woe for’t, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Irreparable is the loss, and patience</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Says it is past her cure.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I rather think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For the like loss I have her sovereign aid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rest myself content.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td>You the like loss!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As great to me as late; and, supportable</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than you may call to comfort you, for I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have lost my daughter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A daughter?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O heavens, that they were living both in Naples,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king and queen there! that they were, I wish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself were mudded in that oozy bed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where my son lies. When did you lose your daughter?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In this last tempest. I perceive, these lords</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At this encounter do so much admire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they devour their reason and scarce think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their eyes do offices of truth, their words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are natural breath: but, howsoe’er you have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Been justled from your senses, know for certain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I am Prospero and that very duke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which was thrust forth of Milan, who most strangely</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon this shore, where you were wreck’d, was landed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be the lord on’t. No more yet of this;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ’tis a chronicle of day by day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not a relation for a breakfast nor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Befitting this first meeting. Welcome, sir;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This cell’s my court: here have I few attendants</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And subjects none abroad: pray you, look in.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My dukedom since you have given me again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will requite you with as good a thing;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As much as me my dukedom.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Here <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</b> discovers <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</b> playing at chess.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td>Sweet lord, you play me false.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, my dear’st love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not for the world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I would call it, fair play.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If this prove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A vision of the Island, one dear son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall I twice lose.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td>A most high miracle!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Though the seas threaten, they are merciful;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have cursed them without cause. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kneels.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now all the blessings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of a glad father compass thee about!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arise, and say how thou camest here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, wonder!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many goodly creatures are there here!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That has such people in’t!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td>’Tis new to thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your eld’st acquaintance cannot be three hours:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is she the goddess that hath sever’d us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And brought us thus together?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, she is mortal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But by immortal Providence she’s mine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I chose her when I could not ask my father</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For his advice, nor thought I had one. She</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of whom so often I have heard renown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But never saw before; of whom I have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Received a second life; and second father</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This lady makes him to me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am hers:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, O, how oddly will it sound that I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must ask my child forgiveness!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There, sir, stop:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us not burthen our remembrance with</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A heaviness that’s gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have inly wept,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you gods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on this couple drop a blessed crown!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For it is you that have chalk’d forth the way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which brought us hither.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td>I say, Amen, Gonzalo!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should become kings of Naples? O, rejoice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond a common joy, and set it down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With gold on lasting pillars: In one voyage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where he himself was lost, Prospero his dukedom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a poor isle and all of us ourselves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When no man was his own.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Miranda</b>.</i> Give me your hands:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That doth not wish you joy!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gonzalo</td>
							<td>Be it so! Amen!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>, with the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Master</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Boatswain</b> amazedly following.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, look, sir, look, sir! here is more of us:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I prophesied, if a gallows were on land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This fellow could not drown. Now, blasphemy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That swear’st grace o’erboard, not an oath on shore?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boatswain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The best news is, that we have safely found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our king and company; the next, our ship⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is tight and yare and bravely rigg’d as when</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We first put out to sea.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</b>.</i> Sir, all this service</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I done since I went.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>.</i> My tricksy spirit!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These are not natural events; they strengthen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From strange to stranger. Say, how came you hither?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boatswain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If I did think, sir, I were well awake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ld strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And⁠—how we know not⁠—all clapp’d under hatches;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where but even now with strange and several noises</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And moe diversity of sounds, all horrible,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We were awaked; straightway, at liberty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our royal, good and gallant ship, our master</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Capering to eye her: on a trice, so please you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in a dream, were we divided from them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And were brought moping hither.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</b>.</i> Was’t well done?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>.</i> Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This is as strange a maze as e’er men trod;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there is in this business more than nature</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was ever conduct of: some oracle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must rectify our knowledge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, my liege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do not infest your mind with beating on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The strangeness of this business; at pick’d leisure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which shall be shortly, single I’ll resolve you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which to you shall seem probable, of every</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These happen’d accidents; till when, be cheerful</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And think of each thing well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>.</i> Come hither, spirit:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set Caliban and his companions free;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Untie the spell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>How fares my gracious sir?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There are yet missing of your company</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some few odd lads that you remember not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>, driving in <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</b>, in their stolen apparel.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>Every man shift for all the rest, and let no man take care for himself; for all is but fortune. Coragio, bully-monster, coragio!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>If these be true spies which I wear in my head, here’s a goodly sight.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How fine my master is! I am afraid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He will chastise me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ha, ha!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What things are these, my lord Antonio?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will money buy ’em?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Very like; one of them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is a plain fish, and, no doubt, marketable.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mark but the badges of these men, my lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then say if they be true. This mis-shapen knave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His mother was a witch, and one so strong</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And deal in her command without her power.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These three have robb’d me; and this demi-devil⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he’s a bastard one⁠—had plotted with them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take my life. Two of these fellows you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must know and own; this thing of darkness I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Acknowledge mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td>I shall be pinch’d to death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td>Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td>He is drunk now: where had he wine?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And Trinculo is reeling ripe: where should they</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Find this grand liquor that hath gilded ’em?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How camest thou in this pickle?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</td>
							<td>I have been in such a pickle since I saw you last that, I fear me, will never out of my bones: I shall not fear fly-blowing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td>Why, how now, Stephano!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>O, touch me not; I am not Stephano, but a cramp.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td>You’ld be king o’ the isle, sirrah?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</td>
							<td>I should have been a sore one then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td>This is a strange thing as e’er I look’d on. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pointing to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He is as disproportion’d in his manners</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As in his shape. Go, sirrah, to my cell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take with you your companions; as you look</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, that I will; and I’ll be wise hereafter</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was I, to take this drunkard for a god</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And worship this dull fool!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td>Go to; away!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td>Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sebastian</td>
							<td>Or stole it, rather. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Caliban</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Stephano</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Trinculo</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, I invite your highness and your train</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this one night; which, part of it, I’ll waste</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go quick away; the story of my life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the particular accidents gone by</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since I came to this isle: and in the morn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll bring you to your ship and so to Naples,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where I have hope to see the nuptial</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of these our dear-beloved solemnized;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thence retire me to my Milan, where</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Every third thought shall be my grave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alonso</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I long</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear the story of your life, which must</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take the ear strangely.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prospero</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll deliver all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sail so expeditious that shall catch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your royal fleet far off. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ariel</b>.</i> My Ariel, chick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is thy charge: then to the elements</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be free, and fare thou well! Please you, draw near. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
